Welcome to this first lecture on the history and future of antibiotic therapy. Today, we're going to talk about some of the fascinating history of antibiotic discovery in the 20th century, and then really begin to transition to ask the question, why aren't we developing new antibiotics as frequently as we used to? And what are the key challenges that remain, either scientific challenges or economic challenges, for developing new antibiotics, it's worthwhile starting with a appropriate perspective. Humans did not invent antibiotics. These originally came from microbes. Microbes have been on the earth far longer than humans. They far outweigh us in terms of metric tons. They can reproduce much faster than humans, and their experience with antibiotics far out seeds humans. So this is a we have to recognize the challenge the antimicrobial resistance and the use of antibiotics far predates humans, even before we started using these drugs therapeutically. Of course, the way bacteria use antibiotics versus humans is completely different. Bacteria are usually using antibiotics as part of a competitive strategy in the environment for food, competing against other microorganisms, secreting these very small amounts in the environment in very small distances, millions of a meter or less, in targeted circumstances under stress, nutritional competition with minimal environmental pressure. Whereas in humans, were using milligrams to grams per day, not a trillion, trillionth of a gram. And in fact, even an animal food production or an environmental waste, there may be 1000s of kilograms of antibiotics put into the environment. So humans use of antibiotics have really related considerable environmental exposure and considerable selective pressure for resistant organisms that just previously did not exist with the natural use of antibiotics. But where do antibiotics come from? They have arisen over time, over evolution, through chemical warfare. Nature. Some of our most prolific sources are the actinomycetes soil, bacteria that produce a wide range of chemical substances that interfere with biological processes or pathways or metabolic pathways, and other bacterial pathogens competing for food in the environment, and of course, the also fungi Penicillium, growing on rotting fruit, is One of the major sources of penicillin that was discovered and improved upon in the early 1940s now, antibiotic therapy as a therapeutic approach actually has maybe a more ancient history. There's evidence that in China, moldy tofu was used discrete to treat skin inflammation and infections of the skin. Moldy bread was used to treat skin lesions in Egypt. And the Greeks described the use of mirror wine and honey or other caustic substances to treat wound infections, but these were not systemic, targeted antibiotic therapies. Interestingly, there was also evidence that the ancient Egyptians actually in the Nubian area. Sudanese Nubian area actually brewed beer that was contaminated with Streptomyces that produced tetracycline and this golden beer was recognized to have antimicrobial properties. And this was later confirmed by analysis of bones, where, of course, tetracyclines bind to bones. It was found that their high tetracycline concentrations could be found in the skeletal remains of ancient Sudanese Egyptian inhabitants of Nubia from 350 to 550 in the Common Era, the first person who is really credited with the discovery and a systematic exploration of a therapeutic drugs that are targeting bacteria specifically is, of course, Paul Ehrlich, who began, who made many discoveries of specific staining of tissues with different chemicals and reagents that allowed us to distinguish between different types of blood cells. And this led to him to develop a hypothesis of a magic bullet hypothesis, that if we could selectively stain certain types of cells, and this was, of course, a major advance in histology, then we may also be able to specifically stain and kill bacteria. And this was his magic hypothesis, so he undertook a vast screening program of chemical libraries to identify active antimicrobial compounds. These were synthetic compounds, and this rational selective screening approach led to discovery of compound after over 600 compounds were studied by. Of an agent that had activity against treponemia pallidum and the first active agent for the treatment of syphilis arsenine, or Salvarsan in 1909 salvason, however, wasn't a perfect drug. It had to be reconstituted prior to administration, and its efficacy largely depended on how skilled the physician was who was preparing the compound and administering it to patients, and in fact, many side effects were attributed to the inappropriate administration or problematic administration the drug, including rashes, liver damage and loss of life and limb because of extravasation caused by the improper handling administration of the compound. So you can see it's relatively toxic. It had to be prepared, probably not in sterile conditions, and had to be injected, provide many injections, but it did have, of course, some efficacy. So this was a promising approach. Alexander's Fleming is the next major giant that's frequently cited in the history of antibiotic discovery. He was, of course, was actually a physician that had a very lucrative practice, administering salvason Because he was very skilled at treating patients with syphilis. And during World War One, Fleming worked in a wound Research Laboratory, and he discovered that chemical antiseptics did not sterilize jagged wounds, but us, in and of itself, had its own antimicrobial properties. And he isolated the enzyme lysozyme, which is produced in tears and secretions, and showed that the substance causes bacteria to disintegrate. But he had problems producing large amounts of lysozyme and couldn't really demonstrate that it was effective as a therapeutic agent. His serendipitous discovery, of course, afterwards, after leaving a colony and agar plate on his bench that became contaminated with mold Penicillium, and the fact that in the zone around Penicillium, staphylococci were undergoing lysis, led to the discovery, or some would say, rediscovery, of a drug that he named penicillin in the auger that was causing the selective antimicrobial activity against staphylococci. So this was a major discovery, but the problem Fleming had is he was not able to purify the compound in sufficient amounts to develop it as a therapeutic agent, or to do further clinical studies, or to do studies in animals to demonstrate its pharmacological effects. So he largely considered it to be a compound that may have some benefits for sterilization, for example, of contaminated glassware, and he did not really develop the compound therapeutically. Around this time, there was also efforts in Germany, following upon Ehrlich's early discovery, to screen chemicals used in the dye industry for clothing, whether or not they may have antimicrobial activity. And Garrett DOMA and colleagues led a program at Bayer pharmaceuticals that found a compound of the based on the sulfonamides that, when metabolized in vivo, had activity in mouse models of infection. And what was interesting is these compounds had to be metabolized, and we later understand that the first drug that he identified, prontocill, had to be metabolized to sulfanilamide in vivo to be active. So it wasn't active in vitro, in the test tube, but in animal models, it did have activity. What's remarkable is among one of the early patients dama got treated was his own six year old daughter who contracted a severe streptococcal cellulitis. When he was told that his daughter's arm would need to be amputated, he treated her with pronto sill, an early formulation that was dark red here, as you can see, and she survived. His daughter recovered without amputating arm, but she suffered permanent reddish discoloration of her skin owing to the drug. Of course, the drug was later purified. This discoloration was removed, but the issues now we have a discovery, a whole new class of antibiotics, the sulfonyludes, and in fact, some of these compounds were used in the beginning, in the late 1930s and 1940s to treat severe infections. Around this time, Flora chain and Healy at Oxford began a program to try to antibiotic discovery, and they led to the rediscovery and purification of penicillin. And of course, unlike Fleming, the major advance was the biochemist Ernest chain and Norman Healy were able to purify larger amounts of the compound to perform animal studies and early clinical studies with the compound. This is some of their first animal testing of penicillin. A big challenge. This was at the beginning of World War Two in. Having appropriate resources to produce enough penicillin. Heatley came upon the idea of using incubation flasks similar to bed pans that were being used in the units, so he could incubate enough of the mold. And they were began to treat animals with this drug, and saw very dramatic results. And you can see in the panel on the left here, animals treated with penicillin 10 milligrams or five milligrams, all the animals basically surviving. But then animals that served as a control we did not receive the antibiotic therapy, all of the animals were dead within 12 to 16 hours after infection. So very dramatic results, and this created a major problem, because then, how do you produce enough penicillin in the midst of the war, when there's all these rationing and problems with supplies? And Norman Healy was very innovative, and divide purification apparatus to produce enough penicillin to allow for early clinical trials. One of the first patients that was treated with penicillin was a policeman who had a severe facial injury. It's often said that it was a injury due to a rose Thorn, but more likely, it was probably injury associated with the bombing and he developed a cellulitis and infection of the eye caused by streptococcus and also staphylococcus. And his clinical case is really quite, really, quite remarkable, if you read the discovery that he had Staph aureus and strep pyogenes. He was treated initially with a sulfa drug, sulfapyridine, but he did not improve. He then developed multiple abscesses on his face and scalp, osteomyelitis and his bones. He also had infection of left eye, his cornea perforated. He was very, very sick, very high fever. He required blood transfusions. He basically began to develop pneumonia, so they started treating him with penicillin, given intravenously, 200 milligrams, IV, then 100 milligrams every three hours, except for two intramuscular doses, he had one small, slight rigor after the first dose, but otherwise no reactions. And then he began to have a striking improvement. After 800 milligrams, the discharge on his scalp went away, the diminution of his right eye separation and conjunctivitis improved. He just dramatically improved after the administration of penicillin. The problem was the penicillin supply was exhausted, and even though the patient felt much better, he then began to develop a recurrent pneumonia with strep pyogenes and marxella cateralis, and unfortunately, he deteriorated and progressed to sepsis and died. Even though there were attempts to try to recover the urine from the patients and re isolate penicillin and purify it, they were not able to produce enough for clinical studies. So it was decided that future clinical trials would focus on pediatrics, where you could use lower doses. So clearly, there was this. The power of antibiotics was demonstrated with these early penicillin studies, these early clinical studies, and yet the major challenge was producing enough penicillin. Interestingly, as a side note, in World War Two, Winston Churchill's life was saved with sulfa pyridine. He developed pneumonia was treated effectively with sulfa pyridine, a drug developed by the Germans. So the major advance then that allowed penicillin to be developed was that Flory and Heatley traveled to the United States and they got the United States pharmaceutical industry to agree to begin to develop and ferment penicillin, and this allowed large scale production of penicillin that allowed for clinical trials, and of course, use of the drug during World War Two. The only downside to this was there had to be agreements that the penicillin would not have a single patent from Oxford. The patent had to be shared among multiple pharmaceutical companies, and there had to be cooperation, which was important, of course, for the war effort, but afterwards, led to, basically, Oxford University not getting any money for the discovery or rediscovery of penicillin and purification, but now we have, we've entered into the modern antibiotic era, and one of the other major advances of penicillin was understanding its structure. This was largely done through work by Dorothy Hodgkin, which was a crystallography expert at Oxford University, and once she discovered the structure of penicillin, which later earned her the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, this allowed scientists to modify the pharmaco for the main compound, to develop semi synthetic versions with broader spectrum of activity, increased stability and reduced toxicity, improved pharmacokinetics. But around this time, we also see. Even with the introduction of penicillin, the first reports of penicillin resistance. Ernest chain and Abraham also reported that there are already Staphylococcus aureus strains that are producing an enzyme that's able to destroy penicillin that we later called penicillin ASE or beta lactamase. And this would then show be shown to be a recurrent problem in the development of antibiotic therapy. But this was really the start of the golden age of antibiotics, the recognition that natural products from molds, from bacteria, can produce compounds that are effective against many common pathogens that cause skin, soft tissue infections, pneumonia, sepsis, urinary tract infections. And as resistance would develop to each class, we would simply go into more focused discovery of identifying compounds that can overcome this resistance and have activity against the resistant pathogens. There was also a parallel track that began to develop, to do chemical modifications of existing compounds and to improve upon their efficacy. One of the major discoveries that led to an improvement and improved drug class against some of these resistant pathogens, especially gram negatives, was a discovery of cephalosporins by Giuseppe ranzu, who was an epidemiologist, but also later went on to become the president of Sardinia when he's Cagliari. He was studying a typhoid infection, and he noticed that Salmonella Typhi was not cultured. Once the sewage was there was effluxed into the sea. So once it was discharged into the sea, Salmonella Typhi was no longer culturable, even though it was present in the sewage in the city, and even though it was assumed it was probably the salt content of the sea water. He isolated a mold, cephalosporium, now known as acrimonium, from the sea water, and found that the cultures produced substances that he named mycitin that were effective against Salmonella Typhi, which is important because Salmonella Typhi was not treatable with penicillin because of production of a beta lactamase. So this mycitin was resistant to the beta lactamase, and he basically found that he had discovered a compound that was resistant to the beta lactamase. He tried to get support from the Italian government, but after failing to do this, he sent the fungus to Howard Florey Oxford, and this led to the isolation of cephalosporin C and a whole new class of antibiotics. The other major giant in antibiotic discovery was in United States. Selman wakesman and his team at Rutgers discovered multiple antibiotics in the 1940s including actomycin, streptomycin and Neomycin, from basically screening soil bacteria belonging to the Streptomyces genus. And Streptomyces were found to be naturally important antibiotic factories and their ability to produce a wide range of antimicrobials, leading to the discovery of many important compounds. Wakesman is also credited with the introduction the term antibiotic, even though the term Antibiosis had been in the literature actually since the 19th century, but the discovery, in particular, of streptomycin was the first effective drug against tuberculosis, which previously was treated by essentially sending people to sanatoriums to breathe fresh air and hopefully get better diet. And this led to a dramatic effects on the treatment of tuberculosis and the health effects. And in fact, one of the first children treated with this new drug, streptomycin in England was the drummer for The Beatles, Ringo Starr and Ringo learned to play the drums when he was recovering in a sanatorium in England during their music therapy at the sanatorium. So he was treated with streptomycin, he survived his infection, and we can see the dramatic effect of this antibiotic had so during the 1950s and 1960s antibiotic discovery had a golden age, screening soil, doing natural product screening for compounds to treat staphylococci and also Some of our important gram negative pathogens, but resistance always became an issue after several years of use, some drugs faster than others, and we quickly began to run into some problems as we move forward, of fewer and fewer antibiotics being discovery, which culminates into the late 1980s 1990s of a discovery void when no new, novel antibiotics are being discovered. So what happened from the 1960s to the 1980s to 1990s Well, essentially empirical screening of natural products, even though there was always some possibility of finding something new if you went. To exotic locales, to jungles, to the Antarctic, to the deep ocean, you can find maybe some unusual organisms that produce unusual antibiotics. Over time, as you're screening the soil and natural products, you're going to keep rediscovering the same antibiotics. So the during the 1940s 1950s we sort of picked the lowest hanging fruit. And the problem then becomes as the further you go along, as you keep if you keep pursuing this strategy of screening natural products, screening Streptomyces, screening soil organisms, you're going to keep discovering the same antibiotics. And this is a problem called de replication, and it became very expensive because you had to spend all of your time purifying things, and then you end up with rediscovering the same drugs. So this became a limiting a cost limiting and time limiting problem, and led to fewer discovery of newer antibiotics. Of course, we didn't have some of the same analytical tools at the times that we now have, NMR, LC, MSMS, some of the very sensitive analytical tools for analyzing compounds that improve the replication efforts. So two different strategies were then applied. One was to take compounds that we already have discovered and modify them chemically to make them overcome resistance problems, and then the other approach is to use a completely more synthetic rational strategy. So the rational strategy was, for example, that the recognition that if you looked at most of the antibiotics that had been discovered, they basically targeted the cell wall or protein synthesis. So instead of just going out and collecting compounds and testing them again against the whole cell bacteria and performing minimum inhibitory concentration, they actually began to specifically look at, as it was understood, targets in the cell wall or protein synthesis to do to focus your discovery on these well understood targets for antibacterial therapy. Also, this is the beginning of the explosion of the molecular genetics and the ability to clone genes and manipulate bacterial strains to enhance wholesale screening so you can identify specific proteins or specific targets and actually develop more specific screens for your drug therapy, rather than just looking at whether or not it will kill a particular bacteria. So this is one strategy that began to be developed in the 1960s and 1970s as novel antibiotic therapy began to falter, the modification of existing antibiotic scaffolds became a much more dominant strategy for bringing new antibiotics. So this is when we see the explosion of fluoroquinolones, of the different cephalosporins, the whole you know, first generation, second generation, third generation, fourth generation cephalosporins, many of these cephalosporins were considered to be only modest improvements, while others maybe had a greater benefit, especially treating gram negative pathogens. So not all drugs had a major impact on our treatment of infections, but they may have had some modest benefits, like improved oral bioavailability, or they may have been easier to formulate in oral formulations, more convenient formulations, more convenient pharmacokinetics. But this is when we get this explosion of cephalosporins, we begin to see the development of beta lactamase inhibitors, globulinic acid, tasabactam and sobactam. But eventually we've come full circle and come back to this strategy of developing new beta lactamase inhibitors that target carbapenemases such as Ava bactem, relabactum, nucobactum and others, and this is to once again reinvigorate drugs that where resistance have made these drugs less reliable, to try reinvigorate these drugs against treating some of our resistant pathogens. Also, this approach was has been used with macrolides and tetracyclines, trying to overcome major mechanisms of resistance that lead to efflux or changes in protein binding. So after erythromycin, we saw Clarithromycin and azithromycin, but more recently, to overcome the resistance problems drugs like digesty clean and and some of the other other drugs, but this, in the end, led to some drugs that were come onto the market did not have significant advantages. Some had toxicity and were later removed from the market. Some of the fluoroquinolones that came onto the market in the late 1990s were. Removed because of lack of major clinical benefit and some increased risk of thing, problems such as Qt prolongation or hepatotoxicity. So once again, we're sort of getting into strategies that began to have less, maybe benefit, and we're not going to produce as many new antibiotics. The major breakthrough moment was thought to be when we began to sequence the genomes of bacteria, things like just haemophilus influenza. The first genome sequence was published in 1995 and then the idea of the pharmaceutical companies was okay. Now we have a whole new way to develop antibiotics. We can compare the genome look for non essential targets or unique targets in the bacteria that are not present in humans, and these could be exploited for completely novel drug targets that wasn't discovered previously. So this made a lot of sense. Once you know the entire genome, you can find selective targets characterize their effects on biochemical pathways, and this should open up the doors to discovering a whole host of novel antibiotics. And yet, these major discoveries in the sequencing the genome occurred in 1995 and still we have this discovery void. So what happened? Why didn't advances in molecular biology lead to and genomic sequencing lead to new antibiotics. This is actually beautifully discussed in a classic paper by David painting colleagues from GlaxoSmithKline welcome, where they invested millions and millions of dollars in a genomics derived, target based approach to screen for new classes of antibiotics with novel modes of action. They talk about a two decade long approach, or a decade long approach of where they evaluated more than 300 gene targets. They did 70 High Throughput Screening campaigns over a period seven years, and they basically discovered no new antibiotics. And it turns out you can discover targets, but many times you discover a drug that inhibits a single target, and if it's only inhibiting a single target through this pathway, there's going to be a high risk of rapid resistance development. They also found that even once they discovered a target, they then would begin screening with chemical libraries. But the chemical libraries were libraries that they already had in the pharmaceutical company, and most of them were very lipophilic compounds with limited structural diversity. These were drug libraries that were designed to be the building blocks for drugs used to treat other human diseases, and not necessarily good libraries for developing antibiotics. So when they applied these libraries to testing, what they found is they often ended up with detergent like compounds or drugs that had too much off target effects or toxicity in mammalian cells. So it's really pretty obvious that even though genomics opened up a whole host of new targets, basically the drug screening libraries were not optimized to make it take advantage of these targets, and the screens rarely identify compounds with gram negative activity, and this is our major need. So the biggest problem was probably the use of compound screening libraries that did not reflect the unique physiochemical property space occupied by known antimicrobial agents. And we have to be quite honest with ourselves, going back to the first slide, that it may be difficult to improve upon millions or billions of years of evolution. If you look at a drug like vancomycin and the structure of this compound, it's a densely deployed functional groups that have multiple interactions with the target. And so this was developed exquisitely over billions of years of evolution, and it may be that developing a single new drug through screening is not going to be as powerful as what's already been produced by nature. So we've began to learn that many of the compounds that were screened were in the wrong physiochemical space. This is basically graphs that show you great dots represent compounds in the screening libraries, and then the the blue triangles and the orange squares represent known antimicrobial drugs. And you can see there's not a lot of overlap between the gray and the the other the triangles and the squares showing that we're basically searching with the wrong type of drugs. Also, it's much more complicated, because if you look at the physiochemical characteristics, this is the basically the lipophilicity the physiochemical space for antibiotics and their activity varies considerably from Staph aureus to gram negatives, where you need, typically need more hydrophilic compounds and even the hydrophilic nature of a compound that's active against Klebsiella pneumonia may be considered. Different than Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and this is because, of course, gram negative bacteria are very tricky. They have this very complex outer lipophilic membrane that excludes hydrophobic compounds, drugs typically have to enter in through porns, but then they may be effluxed out by these efflux pumps, and then they have to reach the periplasm and the cytoplasmic membrane to reach the drug target. So developing a drug physiochemically that can pass through this very complex membrane and avoid being effluxed and can pass through porns is sometimes a major, major challenge, and this is actually also why we don't have a lot of orally bioavailable drugs against gram negative bacteria, because an antibiotic that can do this, there's very few antibiotics that can pass through these, these, these barriers and also be absorbed in the gut. Fluoroquinolones are one major example of a drug class that can do this. So the question is, then, how do we move forward? Should we go back to natural product screening, or should we continue take what we've learned from targeted screening and try still to develop new antibiotics? Well, I think that you can say in the last 10 years, the emphasis has gone back to finding specific inhibitors, developing new beta lactamase inhibitors, inhibitors or carbapenemase and it's a rational approach that still holds promise. You understand what the problem is, you develop something to overcome it, but it may have a temporary lifespan, and we have to recognize that even with a drug like Ceftazidime vivactin, less than 10 years old. We see considerable resistance developing. Of course, technology has continued to advance, and I think that we are with our understanding we need better libraries. We may be able to develop a more better libraries and a more rational, structural approach to overcome the previous 30 years of failure, develop compounds that are better at penetrating bacterial cells, that avoid being effluxed, and really end up with something that could be much more antibiotic like than what we were testing in the past. So I think there's still a lot of potential for targeted screening, for sure, but maybe natural product screening needs to be reconsidered. Again. It's been estimated that less than 1% of prokaryotic and less than 7% of fungal strains have been isolated or culture. So still, there's this tremendous opportunity for non culturable bacteria or fungi to produce compounds that may have antibiotic like properties. And so this definitely needs to be explored. And once again, the fact that we can maybe take advantage of billions of years of evolution may still be one of the most efficient and powerful methods for developing new antibiotics, but the problem is always going to be, once again, de replication, not rediscovering the same old things. Of course, there's been a lot of interest in alternative strategies, antimicrobial peptides, monoclonal antibodies, antibody antibiotic conjugates, so linking an antibiotic to a carrier that can deliver or maybe avoid resistance mechanisms. There's, of course, a lot of interest in bacteriophages, antisense based antimicrobials, basically shutting off or silencing resistance mechanisms and bacteria. And, of course, vaccination and immunotherapy. So we're going to talk about some of these alternative strategies later in the course, and why some of them are been more successful than others, and why it may be difficult to develop vaccines for some of the for example, multi drug resistant organisms. But the final remaining problem we want to mention is the economics. It takes 10 to 15 years from discovery of an antibiotic to reach patients. Typically, the failure rate is over 95% of all discovered antibiotics, and across more than $1 billion or higher more to develop antibiotics. So because it's such a high risk, high failure, expensive field, many pharmaceutical companies have exited antibiotic discovery, and we don't have as many large pharmaceutical companies developing new antibiotics, because it's just not profitable, does not have a good return on investment. So there's been a lot of interest in how do you improve the economics? Because even if a company does develop a new antibiotic, what's the first thing we do? We say we're going to put it on a shelf. We're not going to use it, and so they don't recuperate their money in sales. And so there's been a lot of discussion that maybe we need more of a Netflix like model, that if a company is willing to develop an antibiotic and invest a billion dollars to develop an antibiotic. So then we should pay them once it's developed, irregardless if it's used, de linking the use of the antibiotic from the sales or revenue. And so if we pay for it, even though we don't use it, that maybe ensures that it will be available when we need it. Just like you don't pay for every movie, even if you don't watch Netflix for a week, you still pay your subscription. And in fact, the Italian government has approved some early subscription models to developing or having access to newer antibiotics. So we have to change the economics. It can't be just the fact that you discovered an antibiotic, you invest all this money to develop it, and even if you maybe receive public money or research money to develop the antibiotic, that once the antibiotic is approved by the FDA and the EMA, there needs to be some mechanism to ensure that the antibiotic stays on the market. Because there's been many antibiotics recently, many companies that even though they've gotten an antibiotic to market, they go into bankruptcy because they do not have the money to continue because the antibiotics are not used. So what we've discussed is the parallel problems of the increasing antibiotic resistance and the lack of novel antibiotic but really going back to antibiotic discovery, the initial two schools, empiric versus rational, and each has their converts, and each has their advantages and disadvantages that continue today. The unfortunate thing, I think, now, is that we haven't really reaped the benefits of some of the biotechnology and genomic revolution that other therapeutic fields have in the development of new antibiotics, especially novel antibiotics for gram negative pathogens. And so part of this is ensuring that we fix the economics of antibiotic discovery into the future, so that antibiotics do continue to be developed. So with that, we'll stop here, and we'll look forward to seeing you in the following lectures. I. 

